Hello, I'm Andrew Maine and this is the
OpenAI podcast. Today my guests are
Kevin Wheel, head of OpenAI for Science,
and Alex Luposa, who is an OpenAI
research scientist and professor of
physics at Vanderbilt University. We're
going to be discussing how AI is
impacting science, an upcoming research
paper, and where science might be headed
in the next 5 years.
Maybe the most profound way that people
are going to feel AGI in their lives is
through science.
>> With Chad GPT, I can just launch it in
that direction and that direction, that
direction. The acceleration that is
going to come from these tools is going
to change science.
>> So you're running the OpenAI for Science
initiative. Could you explain what
that's about?
>> Yeah, the the mission of OpenAI for
Science is to accelerate science. So the
the question is can we help scientists
do the next say 25 years of scientific
research and scientific discovery in 5
years instead. Science underpins so much
of of you know what we do and how we
live. And if we can make progress go
faster by putting our most advanced
models into the hands of the best
scientists in the world, we should do
that. That's what we're trying to do.
You could ask like why now? Why didn't
we do this a year ago? But why aren't we
doing this a year from now? One of the
big reasons is we're just starting to
see our frontier AI models being able to
do novel science. So, we're starting to
see examples where GPT5 can actually
prove new things. Maybe not yet things
that humans could not do,
>> but things that humans have not done.
So, these are like these little
existence proofs of GPT5 being able to
break out past the frontier of human
knowledge and into the unknown. And if
there's one thing that I've learned from
now uh you know a year and a half or so
at OpenAI, it's that you go very quickly
from the model can't do something to the
model can just barely do something and
it's not great at it yet, but you see
these these these early examples and
then you know 6 months later, 12 months
later all of a sudden you couldn't
imagine doing this thing without AI. And
I think science is in that initial phase
where we're seeing real acceleration for
scientists that are using AI. sometimes
novel uh you know not yet maybe large
breakthroughs call them small
breakthroughs and that just says that
there's so much potential in this space
>> we've seen examples of let's say AI
helping with mathematical proofs could
you give me an example of how it might
do things in some other areas like
physics or whatever kind of things we
might see in the short term
>> yeah I mean we're seeing examples every
day and they're across the the range of
of sort of the scientific frontier you
see examples in mathematics in physics
uh astronomy, life sciences, like
biology. Uh, Alex, I mean, you've you've
worked on some of these. Maybe maybe
it's a good time to talk about some of
the physics stuff that you've seen.
>> Yeah, I think coming back to uh Kevin's
point about how this is a special time.
That's very much how I feel as well
because I started the year uh 2025
thinking, yeah, Chad GPT is cool like
everybody. I used it when it came out
and I thought it's a great chatbot, but
I I was sure it would take a very long
time before it would become really
relevant for my own work. Uh, so I
started the year, I would say, as an AI
skeptic
>> because I like to see evidence before
I'm convinced of something and um I saw
people using it to help in the writing
and I started to use it for that as
well. It's very useful for proof
reading, but I thought, oh, it's going
to be a while before it gets to do the
special stuff that I'm really a
specialist at.
>> You're like black holes, right?
>> Like black hole physics. Exactly. And I
had this experience early this year
where I was trying to find this magnetic
field solution that describes um what
happens around a pulsar which is a a
rotating star with very powerful
magnetic fields. And I was going for
this very particular solution. I had to
solve a partial differential equation. I
was able to um identify that solution as
an infinite sum over products of special
functions called lejon polomials. And if
you won't go to physics grad school,
this is the kind of thing that you spend
a lot of time getting um familiar with.
And I also like these puzzles. And I was
playing around with the sum. And I felt
like there should be a simple formula
that it evaluates to.
>> And I thought, okay, I have this friend
who has chat GPT 03 Pro,
>> which I didn't have access to at the
time, and I thought, okay, I'm just
going to send it to him and see what
comes out of it. And he sends me back
this output. It thought for 11 minutes,
which at the time I had never seen it do
because I was using the free version,
which doesn't think for as long. And it
gave this beautiful answer where it was
able to understand what the sum was um
and break it down into pieces that it
could tackle and then it had to go and
find this special identity uh that was
published in one paper from the 1950s in
the Norwegian Journal of Mathematics.
And so it understood what the problem
was and it knew about this random
identity that was just the thing for the
job and it used them and it gave this
beautiful output and at the end the
answer was wrong because it made this
silly typo. It added an extra factor in
fraud for it was almost kind of like a
human making a a silly typo at the end,
but it was very easy to check the
derivation. And I I went through it and
I realized, okay, there's this extra
factor, but aside from that, it it did
the work. And that really sent me
reeling because I thought, okay, I would
say that's a uniquely human ability. I I
thought that's something that makes
theoretical physicists special. Um, you
know, now in 2025, clearly they're
capable of doing things that I would
consider amazing.
>> Yeah. I think one of the cool things so
you got examples like Alex's where it
was probably not something that he like
he could have done it himself over
eventually but GPT was able to do it
faster that's acceleration on its own
and there's something qualitative about
that even as well because if you can
explore instead of exploring two paths
over the course of a week if you can
explore 10 paths in parallel in you know
an hour all of a sudden there's a lot
more ideas that you can try and that's
also acceleration we also see examples
in like literature search which you
don't think of as maybe like deep
scientific innovation but it's really
important to be able to understand you
know has somebody worked on this problem
before and if so is there something I
can learn to speed up my own work so um
and we've seen interesting examples
where there was one I might get the
details of this wrong but we were
talking to this researcher and uh he was
saying he was exploring this particular
idea in like highdimensional
optimization and he was like man you
know this thing I'm working on it's
interesting saying but somebody must
have worked on this before. I can't be
the first person to have had this idea.
I just can't but I can't find any
examples. And then he had given it he he
sort of given a description of what he
was working on to GPT5.
And GPT5 found an example from I think
it was like economics or something a
completely different field.
>> Mhm.
>> That used completely different
terminology. So no keyword lookup would
have ever worked. GPT5 did sort of a con
a conceptual level literature search.
Yeah.
>> Found somebody's PhD thesis in German.
So also a completely different language,
you know, it was like basically lost to
time, but this person had done really
interesting sort of related work that
helped him in his research. And so, you
know, that's another area. So, you can
talk about uh the acceleration that
comes from just like novel proofs and
GPT5 being able to do something on its
own or guided by an expert. But there's
also these examples of acceleration in
calculations and literature search and
and all of them contribute to
accelerating science.
>> Yeah. And the exact same thing happened
to me. I was trying to derive this
property of black holes and I got this
equation that described this phenomenon
I was after and it had a three
derivative term which is pretty unusual
and I looked at it and I recognized it's
something called the Schwarzin
derivative which is a special thing that
appears in math and I thought hm wow
this is really strange that this would
show up and I just copy pasted the
equation into chat GPT and said do have
you seen this before and it said oh yes
this is the conformal bridge equation. I
had no idea what a conformal bridge was
at the time and it said, "Oh, just look
up this paper." And that was amazing
because it turns out that this equation
that showed up in my work had already
been studied in some other works. And
I've heard from a lot of colleagues
doing research in physics that there's a
lot of that going on and at the
forefront of knowledge everything
becomes so niche that it's very hard to
know the latest details in neighboring
fields and GPT is an amazing help with
that. Yeah, that's another thing that
we've heard from uh professors,
researchers that we've talked to is
there's so much you have to be so
specialized today. And so sometimes it
gets hard to explore an area outside of
your main area.
>> There's one particular um mathematician
we were talking to said, you know, one
of my last papers, I knew there was an
area that I wanted to go follow it off
in this direction, but it wasn't my
specialty, and it would have taken me a
long time. and I just kind of ended up
feeling like, you know, maybe that's not
the most efficient place for me to spend
my time.
Now, with GPT5, I'm going to go back and
explore that because I've got a a
co-orker, effectively, a collaborator
who has read just about every scientific
paper that's out there and is is, you
know, a pretty meaningful expert on just
about any topic you want. And I think
I'm going to be able to go explore these
adjacencies in a far better way with
ChatGpt than I could have on my own. And
so that's also a fascinating new take,
right? It helps every it it can help you
go deeper like you were saying and it
can also help you go more broad.
Literature search is pretty interesting
because like one of my weird hobbies is
I like to go back and look at when was
some early scientific discovery made
that didn't get utilized till much later
on. You know famous one was carbon
filaments. You know when Thomas Edison
spent all that effort to try to find it
you had been published in like 20 years
before. Of course you know Dewey decimal
system was invented that year. So you
can't blame him. uh other things like uh
silicon assist semiconductor you know
somebody reading the literature we might
have had that 5 to 10 years earlier
ability to replicate DNA that had been
published like 10 or 12 years earlier
before somebody figured that out and
then the shotgun technique we use for
DNA you know understanding you know
figuring out like the DNA sequencing
that was first published in like 1982
but at that time there weren't
supercomputers that could run it right
and that's exciting just to think of
just having a really good tool that can
search through all this stuff and pull
up these answers you Yeah, and I think
especially some of the most interesting
research now happens at the at the
intersections of of two fields. And
again, it's it's hard for one person to
be an expert in two fields, let alone
three or four or five.
>> And sometimes it's tough for humans to
collaborate. You don't necessarily find
the right person. The person doesn't
have infinite patients. And here with
GPT, you have now the option to have a
collaborator that will work 247, has
infinite patients, you know, has read
substantially every scientific paper
written in the last however many years.
And so it's just it's it's a new kind of
collaboration that is its own form of
acceleration.
>> You think about like Claude Shannon's
wife was a mathematician and how much
that a to help what he was able to do.
And I think we forget how much
collaboration really is a factor of
that.
>> But I would say some people hearing this
might go, "Yeah, but it couldn't spell
strawberry last year. It couldn't do
math. So why are we going to have it do,
you know, science?"
>> Yeah. So actually uh I don't even know
if I've told you this. My own sort of
origin story with appreciating uh what
GPT5 could do or in this case it was I
think 0, this was almost a year ago, so
it was 01 preview maybe. Yeah.
>> Um, but I was meeting with uh this this
guy named Brian Spears who's a physicist
at Lawrence Liverour. Um, it was in DC
and we'd never met before. So, I I
didn't know sort of what to expect. I I
thought maybe I was going to go in and
um be talking to him about what was new
and what he could do with 01 preview and
why he should give it a try. Little did
I know, I sat down and and he
immediately took control of the
conversation and said, "Let me tell you
what I can do with your models and like
these are the most amazing things for
science and this is going to change the
world." And he was like, "Okay, let me
take you through this." And he opened up
his laptop. Uh, and you know, he works
on fusion, right? Lawrence Liverour uh
was the first to to do large scale
fusion with positive energy. Like super
exciting. So he's like, "All right,
we're going to take a fusion example and
first I'm going to start with the
undergrad version of this problem." And
so he he shows me this conversation and
he's like, "All right, so you've got,
you know, a a copper rod and we're going
to bombard it with super high pressure
waves. What happens?" And, you know,
he's like, so he he answered and and 01
preview gives a good answer. He's like,
"Okay, cool." So it got the it got the
uh got the undergrad problem right. And
then now let's let's ask the graduate
version of this. Now what happens inside
the the rod itself as you're doing this
and you know what what needs to be true
in order for it to generate these
certain kinds of shock waves. And he
goes through and he's like okay so got
that right. All right. Now let's ask the
posttock level question. All right. Now
let's ask the and at this point I'm like
you know despite having a physics
background I'm just following along for
the ride because he's beyond anything I
can do. like all right now let's ask the
you just joined Lawrence Liverour and
you you know kind of question you've
gone through your posttock you're a
nuclear physicist and he keeps going and
01 preview keeps getting the answer
right and then he's like all right now
let me ask you the you've worked at
Lawrence Liverour for 20 years question
and it goes and and it gets it right and
then not only that but it like suggests
that the only way to go forward is to
use these these set of simulation tools
that are like partially classified or
that only Lawrence Livermore has. It's
like, you know, I don't have access to
these, but if you did, you would want to
use these tools. And he's like, look,
nothing in here that nothing that I just
showed you was something that I couldn't
do. But it would have taken me days and
certainly not everybody at the lab can
do this. Like the acceleration that
comes that is going to come from these
tools is going to change science. And so
I went from like sitting down with this
guy who I thought maybe I was going to
be sort of talking to him about the
value of AI to him just completely
blowing my mind about the the potential
of AI. And this is a year ago. This is
01 preview. You know, we've come leaps
and bounds since then. And the thing
that I always try and and like remind
everybody, the AI models that we're
using today, as good as GPT 5.1 Pro is,
these are the worst AI models that we
will ever use for the rest of our lives.
And when you think about that, the fact
that we're here
>> just implies that the future is very
bright.
>> How have your colleagues been using
these tools?
>> Yeah, there's a lot of different usages,
I think. Um, literature search, here's
what I'm working on. Does it connect to
any other thing? And
>> this is something that we spend a lot of
time on as scientists, just
understanding when something new shows
up in our work, how it connects to other
things.
>> Um, and okay, my own experience that
made me become AI. I think is
>> this is the reason you came to OpenAI.
>> The reason Yeah. And uh when GPT5 Pro
came out, um I I met Mark Chen who works
here at OpenAI. He's chief research
officer. And he gave me a challenge. He
was very proud. He said, you know, why
don't you just give it a hard problem?
And I thought, huh,
you want a hard problem? Okay. And so I
gave it this question,
>> quantum gravity,
>> right? So I had just found these new
symmetries of black holes, which is
something that doesn't happen that
often. And I'd written up a paper that
came out in June on the archive, and I
was very happy about that. Um, and I
thought, okay, well, let's see how GPT
Pro handles this new question. And so I
I gave it the equation. And I didn't say
that it has some symmetries. I yeah, I
didn't give it a leading question. I
just said, "What are the symmetries?"
And it thought for five minutes and it
said, "No symmetries." And I go, "Ha,
it's not there yet. Still better than
the AI." And and Mark Shen is visibly
crestfalled. And he goes, "Okay, well,
just um just give it an easier question
then." And so I think okay I'm going to
give it the warm-up baby version of the
problem which is find the symmetries of
this equation not in the full black hole
spacetime which is complicated but in
the flat space limit where the space
time is empty
>> and hit enter. It thinks for you know 9
minutes and it comes back with this
beautiful answer. Oh, this equation has
conformal symmetry which is the the
correct thing and here are the three
generators and it was very beautiful and
you know this version of the equation it
probably has been studied I'm sure has
been studied many times over the
decades. So, I don't know what he did
exactly, but he came up with the answer.
And I thought, okay, this is very good.
Like, you know, this this is a great
outcome. And then Mark said, "Okay,
well, but now that it's been primed on
the warm-up example, try again in this
instance of chat the harder problem."
And I thought, "Okay, let's go." And so,
we give it the hard problem again. Hit
enter. And it thinks, and it thinks, and
that was the first time I saw it think
for so long. I think it's like 18
minutes. and it comes out with this
beautiful answer that was completely
correct and that blew my mind cuz I had
been working on this for a very long
time. Um, and I would say that that
calculation is at the edge of my
abilities. I think it's something that,
you know, very few people could have
done the way I did it. Um, and so I was
really shocked because, you know, you
spend years of your life training to be
best in class or something and finding
symmetries of black holes and these
kinds of equations. That's that's my
jam. Um, and I thought, okay, so I guess
that just happened. And it really sent
my mind reeling and um, I was a little
bit shell shocked for a few days and
then I just couldn't stop thinking about
it. And after that, I realized, okay, I
have to become involved in this because
to see this capability emerge into the
world like right now and not to not be
involved with this just seemed crazy to
me. I was going to I actually think you
made uh you made a really important
point in the middle of that around the
the fact that you gave it the hard
question. It didn't get it right. You
gave it an easier question, it got that
right, and then you were able to give it
a harder question.
There is still, you know, as excited as
we clearly are about the future here,
there's also a very real sense like when
you're giving GPT5 or any of these AI
models a problem that's on the frontier,
that's at the limit of their
capabilities, they tend to still be
wrong a lot, right? Kind of like any
human would be at operating at the level
of uh at the frontier of their
capabilities. And it takes, you know, it
isn't just automatic yet. Hopefully in
the future it will be, you know, enter
in any hard question and the model
answers it. But today there's a lot of
back and forth and the people that are
best, the researchers that are best at
getting the most out of the models have
a sort of patience to go back and forth
with them.
>> I think that's natural. It's probably
the way that you would work with any,
you know, any two people operating at at
about the limit of their capabilities.
But I I think it's important uh
especially for folks listening to this
who are doing research with the models
to know that it's not it isn't just one
shot and it always works. It there
really is a a back and forth and sort of
a patience that it takes. Um and one of
the interesting research problems that
we're spending a lot of time thinking
about is how we how we uh help people
with how we sort of help reduce that
that cognitive load. Because when you're
working on a problem, say the model is
has a 5% pass rate on some problem. So
technically the model can get it right
once out of 20 times, but it's really at
the frontier. So it's not going to get
it right nearly, you know, even close to
every time. If you're sitting inside
chat GPT and just entering in this
question,
you're going to have to enter it in, you
know, what, 10 times before you have the
odds that it's going to get the right
answer. And that's most people aren't
going to do that. Um, and so there's a
whole host of problems that the model
can solve that people probably try and
are like, "Oh, after three tries it
didn't get it right, so let's I'll move
on. The model's not good enough yet."
And actually it is, but it's just very
hard to tell apart low pass rate
problems from problems that are too
hard. And uh I think that's actually a
really important thing for us to help
researchers and mathematicians get past.
Um because the most interesting problems
right now are going to be the ones where
the model has a very low but nonzero
pass rate. Those are going to be the
hardest problems that the model can
solve. The best ways that it can that it
can help accelerate science. And so
that's a really interesting research
problem that we're taking on uh to try
and make that a little more automatic, a
little less grunt work. But for now,
like putting in the time and really
going back and forth with the model does
yield results. Well, it it feels like
we're at a moment kind of like when we
went from GPT 3.5 to Chad GPT. 3.5 was a
model, extremely capable model, but it
was still effectively a base model and
and I was a prompt engineer at the time
and knowing how to prompt that I could
get great results for it, but it took
all those little tricks to sort of
understand the context.
>> Then when we went to chat GBT and we
understood, okay, we know the kind of
problems people are trying to solve.
Let's make it a little bit easier for
them to get there without having to do
that. It feels like that's kind of where
we're heading into a science though,
that now that you have people like Alex
explaining the problems you're trying to
solve and what you're doing that we may
see like a big acceleration with this. I
think it's probably just a
characteristic of any question that's on
the frontier of or sort of at the limit
of what the models can do. And back with
GPT 3.5 and early versions of 4, the
questions that were at the the limit of
what the model can do were were much
more basic. Mhm.
>> Now there there are questions of you
know scientific research but you still
when you're operating at the frontier
the the pass rate will be low and so you
got to kind of like there's value in in
sticking with it and trying a few
different things and taking the parts
that it gets right and refining them
while telling the model where it got
other things wrong.
>> In this example I mentioned it needed a
warm-up but the warm-up was the obvious
warm-up that you would do as a human,
right? Because actually when I was
attacking this problem, I wasn't
thinking about the black hole case
first. The this flat space limit was the
obvious place to start and that is where
where I I began and so I think um the
models are actually really good but we
could get better at making them think of
the warm-up problem themselves so they
can go go there directly. But more
generally I think there's this um
thing we have to bear in mind which is
that as scientists our role is to push
the edge of knowledge. There are things
that are just beyond the edge and our
goal is to bring them before the edge of
knowledge by understanding them. But
this edge is very jagged. So there are
very basic questions about the universe
like why are there three dimensions of
space or you know what happened to the
big bang? These are things that
everybody wants to know the answer to
and yet even though they're simple
questions, there's really nothing
intelligent to say about this. We just
don't know. They're very hard problems
actually. And then meanwhile there are
these very hard questions that you would
think we wouldn't be able to answer at
all to which we have extremely detailed
answers. We can predict the electron
dipole moment to I don't know 12 decimal
places something crazy. So there the
edge of human knowledge itself is is
very jagged
>> and it takes many years of graduate
school to learn where the edge is and I
think what we we're finding with these
AI models is that the edge of their
knowledge is also very jagged. So you
mentioned, you know, there's some basic
questions that it can't that the models
can't answer. That's true. At the same
time, there's some very hard questions
that they're very well suited for
already today. And I think what's
exciting is that their edge of knowledge
is very jagged in a way that's different
from ours. Um, so obviously as time goes
on, I think the edge of of ability for
these models is going to keep expanding,
but as long as it expands in a way that
is slightly different from our edge,
that's also really interesting because
at at the intersection where where it
can go further than us, we can get ahead
of it. That's where a lot of interesting
things are going to happen, I think.
>> Yeah. Human and AI together are
>> exactly
>> much more powerful than human alone or
AI alone.
>> Exact. I want to explore that a little
bit more, but first uh tell me about the
research paper.
>> Yeah, so we we've we've talked a bunch
about these anecdotal examples that Alex
has gotten from the time that he's spent
with his colleagues that we see coming
in across Twitter, you know, on a
semi-aily basis at this point. and we
wanted to sort of bring them together
and just write something, publish
something about that that that lays out
the current sort of state of GPT5 with
respect to science. Um, and so what we
we've got it's a handful of
collaborators from inside OpenAI and I
think eight or nine academics from uh
beyond our walls across a bunch of
different fields, math, physics,
astronomy, uh, computer science,
biology, material science and uh, the
paper is something on the order of 12
sections, each one highlighting a
different way that GPT5 is accelerating
their work. The goal was not to be, you
know, hypy and say everything is solved.
It's, you know, it's really to say
>> hoverboards for everybody like this is
what works. This is what doesn't work.
Here's what I tried. In many cases,
we're sharing the the chat GPT, you
know, the full share links, the
conversation, so you can see the back
and forth
>> that the scientist has with the model.
>> Um, and it's it's meant to be kind of a
moment in time to say, "This is where we
are today." And I think we'll look back
in 6 months, 12 months and and you know,
we'll probably be much further and
that'll be exciting. But even where we
are today, we've got uh a section in the
paper on the different a bunch of
different examples around literature
search. A section in the paper with a
bunch of different examples around
acceleration, whether it's calculations
and other things like that. Um and then
a section where we actually contribute
four or five new non-trivial results in
mathematics. Um, and a couple of these
are small. A couple of them probably
could have been papers on their own. Um,
and so it you go from kind of the the
mundane but but very pragmatic and real
bits of acceleration to the the more
sort of profound GPT5 actually pushing
past the the current frontier of human
knowledge. Um, and so we're super
excited about this paper. Um, it's, you
know, I think there'll be a lot more to
come. We're not the only lab doing great
work, by the way. Um, Google has been
doing this for a while and I have a ton
of respect for what uh, Demis and the
team have done with AlphaFold and and
more. Uh, I just think we're at a really
exciting time. You know, ideas in
science often have their moment when you
have multiple people coming with the
same idea, whether it's quantum
mechanics like like Alex was talking
about or the light bulb. Right now, it's
very clear that AI is is just beginning
to change science. Um, and it's going to
be an exciting few years. What advice do
you have for students and grad students
in the sciences? Because I hear people
talk about like, ah, we're not going to
need scientists anymore, which sounds
absolutely crazy. It's not like the
telescope got rid of the astronomer. It
actually created the astronomer.
>> Um, how do you feel about that and what
advice do you have?
>> Okay, I think first of all, it's
important to acknowledge there's a lot
of anxiety in academia right now that is
unrelated to AI. it has to do with lots
of changes in the way that science is
organized in this country and we're
still going through these changes. Um so
I think that talking to young people
there's a lot of anxiety surrounding
this. I actually think AI is um a really
exciting new tool that's coming uh
that's becoming available that is going
to help a lot because um it's just going
to make everybody just so much more
efficient. Um, as Kevin was mentioning
earlier, when you work on a research
project, oftentimes you don't know which
way exactly to go, um, you know, you're
here, you want to get there, but there
different possible paths, uh, different
lines of attack. And the whole point of
research is that from the get-go, you
don't know which which way to go. And um
one of the things that's really fun,
actually fun um with GPT is that you can
just say, "Hey, I'm trying to solve
this. Here are some ideas I have." You
can upload some notes that you have or
just this describe it in a few
sentences. And it's very good at getting
what you're trying to do. And then you
can just say, "What if I approached it
this way?" Or, "What if I were to do it
this way?" And it can immediately go off
and chart a path through the unknown.
just signposting um different potential
avenues and that actually saves so much
time because you know okay I'm a human I
have limited time energy and when I'm
going to put in the effort to do a
calculation I spend a lot of time trying
to prototype it and think ahead where
it's going to take me and with Chad GPT
I I I can just launch it in that
direction and that direction that
direction and it doesn't like completely
get everything right but just having
these signposts along the way is so
helpful because then when you do go down
the path yourself. You have somebody
helping you along it feels like. Um, and
I think that's just going to make
everybody faster, more productive. And
you know, I already the young people
that I meet are spending a lot of time
experimenting with Chad GPT and and
figuring out its capabilities. Um, and I
I think it's going to be a boon for
everyone.
>> You mentioned part of the idea of the
paper was to say, okay, this is where we
are now. Let's go look in six months.
Let's talk. We're 5 years since GPD3.
We're 5 years from now. We're sitting
down here.
>> What are we going to see?
>> Oh man, the fiveyear question is so
hard. I mean,
>> it's a great question
>> cuz
>> here's a crystal ball.
>> Yeah. You know, I think I mean the
exciting thing about this field in
general is from like you look back 12
months and you're completely embarrassed
by where you were 12 months ago. you
know, the idea if if I when GPT3
launched, it was unbelievable, right? I
mean, it it I'll speak for myself, it
blew my mind. The idea that AI could do
any of these things. And then
>> somewhere in around like 3 GPT 3.5 and
4,
>> the the the touring test, which we had
held up for like what 75 years as the
pinnacle of artificial intelligence
research, like oh man, the world will be
different when an AI can pass the
touring test. we just went whooshing by
and like now we just don't talk about
the touring test anymore.
>> Um, and even you look back to the
beginning of of this year of 2025
>> and most people were writing code
themselves. Most engineers were writing
all of their own code. And the idea that
you
>> writing it yourself
>> and now fast forward and you've got like
the idea that you would do really much
of anything without leveraging
codecs, claude code, GitHub copilot, you
know, any of these tools, they're all
incredible is crazy, right? You're so
much more productive with it. So just in
12 months, and I don't I in 12 months,
software engineering has fundamentally
changed.
I think over the next 12 months we're
going to see profound changes in the way
that science is done. You know, both in
the stuff that we can do in silico, in
theoretical physics and mathematics and
computer science and I think we're going
to begin to see it in the life sciences,
in the physical sciences. That's over
the next 12 months. I mean, 5 years.
>> So, that yeah, that that's a a question
I think about a lot because when it
comes to have mathematical proof, I can
kind of go into a computer and I can
test that. I can verify that or at least
test with it with some extent. The same
with some sort of equation for physics.
>> But when you get into talking about the
life sciences or material sciences and
stuff,
>> are we going to have a bottleneck of way
more predictions than ways to test them?
>> Well, I think one of the valuable that
there's so many areas where models can
help with life sciences. If you take you
know biology drug discovery for example
there um you have a huge search space
and the the more that models can learn
uh how to prune that search space the
more even if you're going to end up with
uh a bunch of physical real world
experiments to run at the end of the day
if you can intelligently prune the
search space then you can more rapidly
converge on the the drugs that are
likely to work in particular scenarios
um and and then you can think about the
impact you know for uh for that to have
real world impact, you need to make it
all the way through um the the
the regulatory process
>> that is its own process that AI can help
speed up um because you end up needing
to write these huge papers that that
bring together uh you know tons of
different findings and and and so on. So
that
you can take each step of the process.
It can and AI can help upfront as you
prune the search space and try and find
you know candidates that are more likely
to be to meet your needs and meet the
goals that you have and then as you go
through the process to getting this
thing out to consumers and making a real
world impact. Uh AI can contribute there
and we have we have pilots with a number
of the companies in the space doing
that. So it's um it it really is fairly
broad-based.
>> You started off with an interest in
particle physics. you were studying that
and then you found other things and now
you find yourself back in the sciences.
Do you think other people are going to
follow that pattern? Uh I mean I it is
an absolute privilege for me to to get
to come back and work on science and you
know I am nowhere near the scientists
that uh folks like Alex and other people
here at OpenAI are but I I don't know of
something you know I I
think we talk a lot about AGI at OpenAI
artificial general intelligence.
I think maybe the most profound way that
people are going to feel AGI in their
lives is through science.
>> Yeah, ChatGpt is an incredible tool. I
use it tons of times every single day.
But AGI inside Chat GPT will be we'll be
able to do lots of things. But when I
can have, you know, personalized
medicine, if AI models can contribute to
science, uh, you know, finding a way to
do scalable fusion more quickly, those
kinds of things will change all of our
lives.
>> Uh, and I I think I I think these are
very real possibilities at the pace that
we're going. So that's why this is the
most exciting thing in the world uh to
me to get to work on. I I don't know
what AGI will look like, but sometimes
the experience you have of giving Chad
GBT really hard equation you're working
on and it just spits out the answer to
me that feels certainly like something
approaching that. And I I also don't
have a crystal ball and also clearly a
bad track record of predicting where AI
is going given that at the start of the
year I didn't think I'd be here. But um
there's two things that are
simultaneously clear to me. one is
um the models are definitely going to
keep getting better um and sometimes my
colleagues ask me oh are we reaching a
plateau and that that is actually
something I was wondering about too and
then I joined openAI and I got to play
with some internal models that we have
that are even stronger and I was like
okay this is definitely going to keep
getting really really good and then the
second thing is I think already with GPT
5 Pro which is I think our best or 5.1
pro today our best model that's
available on on the outside. I think
there's a big gap between what the
models can do and what the science
community uses them for. And one of our
goals here at OpenAI for Science is to
is to start bridging that gap. Um
because I think the models move so fast
that unless you're really paying
attention, you may not realize how much
has changed in just the last few months.
Um, and so I think these two facts are
true and are going to, you know, over
the next year really lead to big changes
in in science. The models just keep
getting better and people are starting
to catch on and that's why we're seeing
all this chatter on Twitter and social
media and that's only going to
accelerate. So where that takes us, I
don't know, but I'm excited to find out.
I I think you've both made a very good
point in that is that these models
improve at such a rapid pace that
sometimes people have a very firm idea
of what they are because they tried
something six months ago. Yeah.
>> And I've encountered with people who I
really respect and the scientists are
like, "Oh, I tried it." And I'm like, "I
tried it 18 months ago." Yeah. And
they're not used to a tool evolving that
quickly.
>> Yeah. Or they're using the free version
because, you know, of course that's how
everyone starts.
>> Um and the free version doesn't think
for as long and so it can't solve
problems that are as challenging. Um,
yeah, I think that's really real. It's
one of the reasons that I I I think the
best advice is to just like keep trying
the problems. Even if you're working on
problems and
as you try them on GPT5, it like isn't
super helpful. I wouldn't give up. I
would keep trying it every few months
and I think at some point, you know,
it's going to start being valuable if
it's not already there. Today,
we talked about sort of uh thinking
time. Yeah, that's another area that
we're really excited to see that
>> with GPT5 Pro
>> you can get the model I've seen it think
for what maybe 40 minutes on on some of
the hardest problems.
>> Um but you know it has a it has a
certain amount of of sort of compute
allowance
>> because we have to serve it to
>> many many many people. Uh
40 minutes is certainly not a limit on
thinking like the models can think for
two hours, six hours, 12 hours, 24
hours. And one thing we continue to see
is that pass rate on hard problems
continues to improve as you give the
models more time to think
>> which is like you know it's surprising
actually the number of times there's a
totally reasonable human like intuitive
human analogy to these things. There are
a lot of problems that I can't solve in
20 minutes, but that I might be able to
solve if you gave me two hours.
>> System one and system two thinking.
>> Yeah. And some that I can't solve in two
hours, but if I had a day to really
think about it and try different things,
I might get there. And the models are
the same way. So being able to give a
much smaller, you know, there aren't as
many scientists in the world as there
are users of chat GBT. If we could find
ways to give scientists that really know
how to use the models, well, just a huge
amount of compute. I think that is yet
another way that we can accelerate
science. Yeah, it's a it's a very good
point because you'll hear people talk
about we hit a wall or whatever and one
of the things that was really an amazing
describing which you know year ago we
found out about the whole the reasoning
paradigm and the fact that you can just
take the model of today and let it think
longer and we think about you know
people go what would we do with all this
compute we're building all these this
hyperscaling it's like even using
today's models and letting them think
for a long time we could probably have
some amazing discoveries.
>> Yeah 100%. I I think if if model
progress stopped today, just the process
of of driving awareness within the
scientific community and giving people
more of the best that the models can
deliver, I think we would see a large
amount of scientific acceleration. But
of course, progress is not going to stop
as Alex was saying. And so it when you
think about the models being able to
think for a longer time um being able to
train them to do harder and harder
scientific tasks um and actually also
just you know getting out in the
scientific community and helping people
see what the frontier really is and how
they can use the models better to do the
work that they're doing. Um I just like
I'm excited to see where this goes over
the course of the next 6 months, 12
months, 24 months.
>> Yeah, I think this is a really unique
time in history. It feels like a special
moment. And to be clear, we're not
telling people drop whatever you're
doing and come do AI. That's not the
message.
>> I think what we want to say is
>> keep doing what you're doing. But also,
there's this great new collaborator,
this new tool you get to use that's
going to make it even more fun and it's
going to bring new life into a lot of
different fields.
>> One of the challenges right now with
benchmarks is that models when we talk
about terms like saturation, a lot seems
like models have done that. Also, a lot
of them are just don't seem that
impressive anymore. Now, it looks like
we're moving to the scientific room
here. What does scientific benchmarks
look like?
>> Yeah, like with many things, there's
sort of an intuitive uh way to
understand this. As the models get
smarter, benchmarks are just a way of of
testing the model in some sense. And as
the models get smarter, you need to give
them harder and harder tests because
they learn how to ace the the earlier
tests. So if you take GPQA which uh
stands for Google proof Q&A, it's a it's
a a scientific benchmark that asks
basically PhD level questions across a
range of scientific fields. We thought
for a long time that was a very hard
benchmark to beat. I I think it came out
in 2023 and GPT4 originally was like at
39% on this benchmark. Humans, by the
way, are at about 70%. But now you fast
forward 2 years and our latest models
are nearly at 90%.
>> Wow. So they're surpassing the
capability of most humans in their field
of scientific study across every field
at once, which is kind of amazing when
you think about it. Um, but that isn't,
you know, those aren't the hardest
questions in the world. And that's one
of the reasons that we're focused on uh
new evaluations that ask frontier
science and mathematics questions. It's
also, you know, we released something
called GDP val recently, which is an
eval that tests the model's ability to
do economically valuable tasks. So the
the smarter the models get the harder
the tests that we want to keep giving
them. Uh because you know every gap that
we see every place where the model can't
answer a certain question that's
feedback for us and gives us a way to
improve the model further.
>> Curing disease great what area though
beyond that would you really like to see
and it could be crazy or weird or odd
you'd like to see scientific
acceleration.
>> You want to go first?
>> Well I'm very selfish so I have my own
interest. Um, I really like black holes.
That's my passion.
>> You want to build a black hole.
>> Uh, I think there's a lot of potential
for how AI can uh accelerate black hole
research. And of course, I I want to see
it help with cancer and drug discovery
and all these good things. But my first
priority is, yeah, I want I want to see
more AI helping with black holes. Um,
so, you know, there's a lot of ideas on
the table and so much potential. One
thing is um there are a lot of
theoretical questions that are very
thorny and I think if uh you just sat
down and you could understand everything
that is known and you could integrate it
integrate that knowledge I think a lot
of things would fall out of that. Um and
that's one of the things that we're
exploring. um you know um dark matter
for instance is something that we've
been talking about because um there's a
lot of data on dark matter from various
experiments but we still have no idea
really what it is. There's a bunch of
theories out there. I think a really
interesting idea is could it be that by
um feeding Chad GPT all the experimental
data that is known about dark matter and
all the theories it could rule some of
them out already by combining bits of
knowledge that are just so dispar that
it's hard for our human minds to hold
them together. Um I think that's kind of
an exciting frontier. Um, and then I
think also since we were talking about
the far future, um, experimental work is
totally not out of the question. Right
now we're focused on more theoretical
fields because they can be done in
silic. But you could totally imagine
using AI um to design better experiments
and maybe run very hard complicated
experiments including maybe for black
hole physics in other fields. I think
there's a lot of um ground to explore
here and very exciting possibilities.
>> Yeah. And I'll say fusion um just
because the I if we can actually we have
again small scale uh or I mean large
scale but small small uh existence
proofs of it. Um so clearly it can work
and the the challenge now is to do it
like uh at at bigger scale more reliably
clearly it's possible. we will figure
this out. But if we can accelerate it,
then you know the world the world with
fusion is a significantly better place
than the world without. We solve a lot
of problems if we if we solve fusion.
And uh you know I'm excited to see if
maybe we can contribute in some way. I
think it's easily overlooked by people
how much we're dependent upon energy and
if we had the same orders of magnitude
improvement on energy produ production
that we had in the last 200 years what
that unlocks and you think about you
know things that are energy intensive
like desalinization you know or
construction and other things and when
you have really really really unbound
energy
>> yeah it's incredible
>> I mean some groups might need to like
might be looking to build lots of
infrastructure for lots of GPUs, for
example.
>> Yeah.
>> Who know who who might want to do that?
>> But even him, even beyond that, I think
that we're going to probably see from
that the infrastructure buildout a lot
more energy devoted to energy. And much
like mobile phones and laptops made
electric cars a lot more efficient
because of all this money being thrown
into battery technology, I think we'll
probably see that offshoot.
>> Yeah. And I think, you know, anytime you
change something by an order of
magnitude, the world changes. I think
the the what we've seen over the past
year with the way that software
engineering has changed. You now don't
need to be trained as a software
engineer to write you know meaningful
amounts of of code. That means you can
bring you know there are like what 30
million software engineers in the world.
I think now 300 million maybe three
billion people can can write software
and that's going to fundamentally change
things if we can move you know if we can
make energy 10 times more prevalent 10
times cheaper it will change the world
and I think it's a really uh high
potential place for us to apply the
intelligence of our models and
>> if I can add something we have ideas
that we're excited about in terms of the
potential of AI to change science but
this very much not supposed to be a top-
down effort where we dictate what AI is
going to do in the world. We're actually
very excited about building the best
general purpose AI. And if we release
that into the world, then everybody will
take it and use it for their own
purposes. And you know, for me, I'm a
black hole physicist. I want to use AI
to further black hole science. But you
know, for a scientist in another field,
I think it's natural to use it for that.
And the nature of research is such that
it's very hard to know where the next
breakthrough is going to come from
really. And so I think our our vision is
to push this out into the world. um we
can see I think we could see a lot more
adoption than we have today and once
that happens um who knows who knows
where the next biggest discovery will
come but that's how we give us the the
give ourselves the best chance to
accelerate scientific discovery
>> yeah it's such an important point that
the the frontier or the the the surface
area of science is massive and this is
not about what we can do within open AI
individually to to accelerate science or
to accelerate specific scientific
projects
It's about giving scientists all around
the world AI so that they can accelerate
their work. That's how we move science
forward faster. Um, so you know there
there are pieces I think that we will
try and do because it'll help us learn.
But the vast majority like what we
really want is to see a 100 scientists
win Nobel prizes using AI.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah. It feels like it's not the end of
science. It's really the start.
>> Exactly.
>> Certainly it's a it's sort of a there's
a science 2.0 I know a moment happening.